## Cyber Security Metanoia

We all have experienced metanoia at one time or another. Many of us may be able to reflect on our stories and locate with ease those remarkable and pivotal moments in our lives when “everything changed”, when we felt almost as if we had become “a different person” – experiences which altered the path of our narrative in fundamental and profoundly influential ways. Often, metanoia can draw us from a trajectory of a diminished self onto a journey into life in all its fullness and through which we will become more fully ourselves.

Most of us can look back and note times in life when our ideas and corresponding actions seemed to shift from one trajectory to another. The religious term “conversion” represents such a change, but there are others such as “falling in love” or the adoption of a cause through personal crisis or simple curiosity.

Whenever a person experiences a paradigm shift to a different level of reality, Metanoia is what occurred. It is what has happened when I literally, “put away childish things”, like treating my spouse in a certain way based on the way I saw my parents behave with one another, or treating my colleagues and employees as I might have treated others in the schoolyard.

Metanoia is the gateway to the hallowed grounds of integrity. “A rising tide lifts all boats”. The accumulated impact of a change of heart in one person after another gradually begins to raise the standards for “normal” behavior. And so it begins, by definition, with the non-conformity of one or a few. This requires unusual courage – not of fearlessness, but of conviction.

Metanoia seems to have seven distinct characteristics which can be summed up in this statement: something boundless and unexpected, beyond reason and mysteriously compelling that sparks non-conformity borne of conviction, a deeper connection to others, and fuller knowledge of our own story and identity, toward a new world.

1.   **Boundless and Unexpected**: Metanoia invites us to embrace something – a cause or a new reality that is simply larger, often much, much, larger than we are. Through it, we are drawn beyond our previously understood limits, outside of our comfort zone and into an unexpected domain. We become part of something larger and that “something” often yields a deeper sense of meaning and purpose.

2.   **Beyond Reason**: While our minds are often rigorously engaged in reason and thought may dominate the discovery of our new point of view after the metanoia, the experience itself always transcends mere reason and is often intensely, deeply personal. It is not simply that we change our minds or even that they are persuaded to change, but rather that we are ourselves changed.

3.   **Mysteriously Compelling**: Like the forest fire that creates its own wind, an experience of metanoia brings with it an energy that lifts us beyond the mere contingencies of our own resources. We find ourselves caught up in something more powerful than any force of will we might generate. Metanoia produces momentum greater than even our own desires, momentum that mysteriously propels our shift in attitude or action.

4.   **Non-conformity Borne of Conviction**: The simple phrase, “a change of heart and mind,” implies the fact that metanoia always involves some kind of rejection of the status quo, and for those who have experienced metanoia, to remain in the place of the present becomes intolerable, even impossible. This is usually an outwardly noticeable aspect of metanoia, as it may involve a change in physical factors such as priorities for action, relationships, or even whole career trajectories. Such non-conformity does not result from a lack of fear, but rather arises from deep-seated conviction. At a much deeper and even sub-conscious level, metanoia may involve the rejection of long-ingrained patterns of thought, habit, or action due to things like childhood experiences, adaptation to environments, or response to our own suffering.

5.   **Connection to Others**: Through metanoia we are inevitably drawn into deeper relationships with others. We often speak of “joining” a movement – something we cannot manufacture alone. Through metanoia we discover connections to others that deny the myth of our isolated self and bind us in a shared unity not to something else, but to someone

6.   **Knowledge of our own Story and Identity**: We may consider ourselves to be “self-made”; we are not. Rather, our self emerges from the complexities of our unique narrative. Metanoia draws us to a better understanding of that narrative, which is why we desire it, and yet are often afraid of the personal consequences that usually result, which for the most part lie beyond our control.

7.   **Toward a New World**: As metanoia opens us to broader horizons than those of our own creation and previous understanding, we discover opportunities and paths that were unexpected or even un-imagined. We are opened to new possibilities through which our identity and capabilities are enlarged perhaps even beyond our wildest dreams. We find ourselves in a “bigger world”, compelled to work toward a vision we have been granted of a “better world”. With such enlargement of vision comes an invitation to bring more of ourselves than we may have even known existed with full commitment to a task or role we could not have imagined.

Metanoia in the scope of cyber security is one of the practices that advocates that to make a change in the companies, it is necessary to promote "changes in the minds of the collaborators". If this does not happen, even if there are new machines, tools, new software, etc... there is no effective and innovative effect.

The new breed of cyber-attacks is being launched by threat actors who are determined and have ample tools and tactics at their disposal. When they hit a road block, they will adapt or switch up their tactics. To combat these active adversaries, cyber risk management should be undertaken comprehensively, across the enterprise. The way we think companies should be looking at cyber risk these days is in terms of an overall framework that encompasses assessment, management, and response.

Even an unlimited budget for information security will not eliminate the cyber risk. Defending against cyber risk requires enterprise-wide commitment and diligence. Your suppliers’, customers’, and partners’ cyber vulnerabilities may also me yours as they can unwittingly provide a back door into your organization. Hackers are extremely adaptable, changing their tactics as their targets implement cyber defense processes. Organizations can use metanoia to change of mind and stay ahead of cyber-attackers.

This scenario adds a third dimension to the traditional inside or outside the firewall environments–a risk that floats between the two. And it requires another layer of preparedness.

To prepare for what lies ahead, CISOs must elevate their organization’s approach in five areas:

Defense: get active – It is an emerging trend that any technology executive must follow: the adoption of a more dynamic, proactive approach to cyber security. “Active defense” measures employing an intel-to-operations model are now a requirement, not an experiment. Cyber strategies now use real-time intelligence and assessment data to shape decision making, fine-tune defenses and preempt threats.

Leadership: syndicate the risk – Too often, the cyber threat is treated as an IT problem requiring an IT solution. Yet as the stakes grow higher, cyber attacks now touch every part of the organization. Product development, organizational strategy, HR, legal, marketing: they all play a role in preparedness, defense and response. It is critical that risk and responsibility be spread out across the organization. Anything less will result in a flawed approach–and a potentially shortened tenure for the senior technology executive.

Systems, product development: think cyber security – Historically, speed-to-market has been the number one imperative driving everything from product design to systems implementation. Cyber security considerations were once an afterthought: now, they are becoming a consideration, albeit one that is largely retroactive. IT leadership must lead a fundamental shift to “embedded security,” with cyber defense a driver of product and systems development, rather than a bolt-on. This shift is particularly important as the Internet of Things expands the attack surface.

Incident response: cut through the hype – With cyber a mainstream and Board-level issue, the market is crowded with companies pitching “incident response” capabilities. For the corporate buyer, it is a hype-fueled, “buyer beware” environment. Does the incident response offer include the right balance of multidisciplinary expertise needed–like crisis communications, legal, policy, business and technical? What about the people behind itand the proposed step-by-step methodology? With the stakes growing higher, leaders must take a discerning look at incident response solutions.

Preparation: practice or perish – An effective cyber response requires two behaviors that do not come naturally to large organizations. First, different areas must work together around an issue where there has been little collaboration. Second, they must do so quickly, with an operational velocity that is often lacking in the day-to-day business. Practice–through collaborative planning and real-time simulation drills–is the only way to achieve the required level of readiness. 

Track data flow, cross-silo and data transformation to exploit existing capabilities you might already. Remember, the data are pervasive thus the controls should also be!
